Where does crude oil come from?
It is pumped from wells drilled into the ground. 
Crude oil reserves lie hundreds or thousands of feet below the surface of the earth. Oil companies drill down into prospective reservoirs to find the oil and pump it to the surface. Of course, many of the wells drilled are 'dry holes', meaning that no commercial quantities of oil are found there.
Crude oil is a mixture of various different compounds called hydrocarbons. These different hydrocarbons need to be separated in a column by which process?
Fractional Distillation 
Fractional distillation takes place in the fractionating column. The crude oil enters the chamber and, due to differing boiling points, the hydrocarbons are separated into different groups such as naphtha and bitumen.
Hydrocarbons are compounds that contain ONLY hydrogen and carbon atoms within their structure.
What is the term commonly used to refer to the act of deviating a well bore to head in the direction desired?
directional drilling 
Directional drilling has advanced the ability to get otherwise unreachable oil. It is now common practice to drill a well horizontally (90 deg.), to distances of 2 miles or more!
What is the first step that crude oil undergoes in a refinery?
It is heated, and the water and salts are removed. 
Raw crude oil contains water and salt that would interfere with the refining equipment. Initially, the oil is heated to lower the viscosity of all the fluids involved, and then run through an electronic grid that makes saltwater fall out of the oil.
Which of the following substances can be isolated by the method of separating the mixture of hydrocarbons found in crude oil?
Oil of Vitriol
Sodium Thiosulfate
Phenol
Kerosene
Kerosene 
Kerosene has a boiling point between the temperatures of 150 and 250 degrees on the Celsius scale. 
Oil of vitriol is the former name of sulfuric acid
What is the name commonly given to the liquid used in drilling a well?
mud 
Many additives are mixed with water, diesel or synthetic oil to make up mud. The properties of the mud are very important to the safe and productive drilling of a well.
What is crude oil distillation?
A process in which oil is separated into its different components. 
Crude oil is a mixture of oil compounds that are separated by multiple boiling and condensing steps into various components. In a distillation tower, the lightest fractions go to the top, and the heaviest components go to the bottom, with intermediate cuts in between.
Chains of hydrogen and carbon atoms called hydrocarbon compounds tend to be too large to be considered useful in industry. What is the name of the process which allows large hydrocarbon molecules to be broken down into smaller hydrocarbon molecules so that they are efficient to use in industrial processes?
Cracking 
Cracking makes large hydrocarbon chains far easier to use industrially. A common example is the process of cracking hexane (C6H14) into butane (C4H10) and ethene (C2H4).
What is the name commonly given to the Oil Company representative who is present while drilling is taking place?
the Company Man 
Company Men are not always men. Most Company Men these days don't actually work directly for the company who owns the well. They are usually contract employees working for a consulting firm.
Environmental regulations dictate that a refinery has to remove certain pollutants from the products before they leave the plant. What contributor to 'acid rain' is removed in the refining process?
Sulfur 
Sulfur comes out of the refinery as a by-product. Elemental sulfur is yellow in color and leaves the plant as a hot liquid in insulated trucks or rail cars to be sold to chemical plants. The removal of sulfur from the oil products means that the sulfur emissions from burning the oil are greatly reduced.
Products of hydrocarbon chains can be used in the formation of plastics. If a molecule of ethene (C2H4), a member of the alkene family, reacts with other ethene molecules, what plastic is formed?
Polythene 
This can also be written as Poly(ethene) and is commonly used in the production of plastic bags. It is a thermoplastic which means its chemical structure can be manipulated when exposed to high temperatures.
What is the name given to an offshore drilling rig?
All are names given to an offshore drilling rig 
Semi-submersibles are floating vessels that are partially sunk to add stability. Jack-ups are vessels with long legs that can be to touch the ocean floor. The body of the vessel is then jacked-up about the waterline roughly 50-70 feet. A drillship uses sophisticated technology called dynamic positioning to keep itself in place while the drilling is underway.
What is cracking?
Telling a joke inside the plant.
A refinery operator wearing pants that hang too low.
Turning oil into crack cocaine.
Breaking large oil molecules down into lighter ones by the use of heat and catalyst.
Breaking large oil molecules down into lighter ones by the use of heat and catalyst. 
Crude oil contains a large percentage of heavy oil compounds that need to be broken down in order to create more useful products. Cracking units use high temperatures and catalyst to break down the heavier components into lighter ones. Operating temperatures in some cracking units can exceed 1300 degrees F.
Also, because the products are lower density than the feedstock, cracking units actually produce more gallons than they take in.
The alkene family is known as having one double carbon to carbon bond within its structure. This gives it the ability to react with other members of the alkene family. A good example is when a molecule of ethene reacts with another molecule of ethene. Ethene molecules are considered to be monomers. What is the name of the chemical process whereby monomers join together to form longer chains?
Addition polymerization 
Addition polymerization is where smaller monomers react with each other to create longer chains called polymers. A prime example of an addition reaction is that of the monomer chloroethene (CH2CHCl). If many chloroethene monomers react with each other then poly(chloroethene) is formed - n(CH2CHCl). This is also known as PVC and is used in products such as plastic water pipes.
An homologous series is the name given to groups of molecules that share chemical similarities. Examples being alkanes, alkenes and carboxylic acids.
What form of water is the most prevalent in oil refinery processing?
Steam 
Considering the temperatures involved in the refining process, liquid water is the enemy of many process units. Steam is produced in large quantities by the refinery and is consumed internally. Heavy water is one of the building blocks for nuclear weapons and has nothing to do with oil refining.
Polymers are, in general, relatively unreactive. One way to dispose of many polymers is to burn them. If a plastic contains sulfuric impurities however, how does this pose an ecological threat?
Acid Rain 
Acid rain is a serious problem for numerous reasons. Firstly, it can catalyse the erosion of rocks and more seriously statues and forests. Secondly, it can make lakes and other stores of water more acidic which can adversely affect the microclimates and habitats of the region.
What is the nickname given to the workers who work on a drilling rig drill floor?
Roughnecks 
The roughneck's job is to assist in making connections of drill pipe as a well is being drilled, assist in disconnecting pipe when pulling it back out of the well bore, and to keep the drilling rig clean and in working order.
Chippies are carpenters, sparkies are electricians and bean counters are accountants.
What is the proper spelling of the light oil cut that ends up in gasoline after the refining process is complete?
naphtha 
Naphtha is a low-octane fraction of crude oil that is upgraded before being blended into gasoline. Naphtha is the most commonly misspelled word in refining terminology. 
NAFTA is the North American Free Trade Agreement that was ratified in the early 1990s.
The hydrocarbon ethene can be used to create ethanol. There are a few ways of doing this, however, which of the following substances can ethene react with to create ethanol?
Carbon Dioxide
Carbon Monoxide
Nitrogen Dioxide
Steam
Steam 
Ethene and steam (H2O) react to form ethanol. Ethanol is a member of a chemical family called the alcohols. These are identified by the presence of (OH) within the formula. Ethanol is shown by the formula (C2H5OH) and can be used in beers, wines and also various types of fuels.
What type of formations are oil and gas usually found in, particularly in the Middle East?
sand 
Sand is often permeable and oil and gas will naturally migrate to such a formation.
What is "octane rating" for gasoline?
A measure of how well gasoline will perform in a car engine. 
Octane rating is a key measure of gasoline quality. If the octane is too low, your engine will 'knock' and not run well. If it's too high, the refiner is throwing away money (or you are paying too much for the fuel).
When using ethene to create ethanol, a catalyst is used. Which?
Phosphoric Acid 
Phosphoric acid has the chemical formula H3PO4. A catalyst is a substance which accelerates the rate of a reaction without reacting itself.
What is the name given to the tall, main structure of a drilling rig?
the derrick 
The derrick is the part of the drilling rig that houses the block and drill line used for lowering and raising the drill pipe in the drilling process.
The heaviest material that comes out of a refinery is a product that you and I use almost daily. Where can you find it?
On roads and parking lots 
Many plants produce asphalt for sale to paving contractors. Asphalt has to be kept above 400 degrees F to make it flow as a liquid.
Asphalt is also used in roofing shingles.
Alkanes and alkenes are two chemical families found within crude oil. What chemical substance can be used to differentiate between two unknown substances - one containing an alkane, the other, an alkene?
Bromine Water 
Bromine with water (alternatively bromine with trichloroethane) forms an orange solution. It can also be described as a yellow to brown colour. When bromine water is added to an alkane there is no reaction, hence, no colour change. When bromine water is added to an alkene, a dibromo-alkane compound is formed and the colour of the solution changes from the original orange (yellow/brown) to a state of colourlessness.
It smells like rotten eggs, and one good whiff of it in high concentrations will kill you instantly. It is sometimes encountered in formations while drilling for oil.
Hydrogen Peroxide
Sodium Sulfide
Boric Hydroxide
Hydrogen Sulfide
Hydrogen Sulfide 
Concentrations of H2S as low as 10 PPM (parts per million), or .001% by volume, are considered unhealthy by OSHA. Short term exposures to concentrations between 10 and 100 PPM can cause mild eye and respiratory tract irritation, headaches, and nausea. Short term exposure to concentrations between 100 PPM and 400 PPM can cause serious eye and respiratory tract irritation, headaches, severe nausea, and disorientation. Anything above 300 PPM is considered lethal.
What is the name of the tall pipe that burns off excess gas from the refinery (and often shows a visible flame)?
Flare 
The flare is a safety outlet for a refinery's operation. Gases that escape overpressure devices in the plant are burned in the flare. If you pass a plant and the flare is burning brightly, they are having operational problems.
I once worked at a refinery where one of the neighbors called up on a Saturday afternoon to say that they were having a party in their back yard that evening, and they would appreciate it if we could make the flare burn heavy for them that night to help light up the yard.
The combustion of hydrocarbons is a common process used in industrial chemistry. When a hydrocarbon combusts in a plentiful supply of oxygen (O2) gas, the by-product would be carbon dioxide (CO2). When there is a limited supply of oxygen, what would be the by-product?
Carbon Monoxide 
Carbon monoxide (CO) is an extremely poisonous gas and can be fatal. Carbon monoxide can attach to molecules of haemoglobin, situated in red blood cells. The bond between the carbon monoxide and haemoglobin, which forms carboxyhaemoglobin, is a far stronger bond than that of oxygen and haemoglobin (oxyhaemoglobin). The presence of carbon monoxide in the haemoglobin pigment reduces the capacity of the red blood cell to carry oxygen around the body. The oxygen cannot be transported quick enough to suffice the needs of, amongst other processes, the mitochondria to respire. Eventually oxygen transportation will not be efficient enough for the body to function properly and fatalities can arise.
Which of these terms describes the situation when the pressure of an oil or gas well overcomes the hydrostatic pressure exerted on it by the drilling fluid while drilling?
a wash out
a spew out
an outflow
a kick
a kick 
A kick is a very dangerous situation and great measures are taken to try to prevent its occurrence.
ariba
petroleum